# Basics of Sound #

Sound is the result of vibrations generated by objects, which induce pressure variations in a medium, such as air. These pressure variations propagate as waves through the medium, and when they encounter an observer's eardrum, they cause it to vibrate, initiating the process of hearing.


## Sound Wave Attributes ##

Sound travels in the form of vibrational waves through different materials, it has there basic attributes:

1. **pitch (frequency)** - high or low a sound is perceived. Higher frequencies create higher pitches.

2. **loudness (amplitude or volume)** - the perceived volume or intensity of a sound. Greater amplitude produces louder sounds.

3. **timbre** - quality or tone color of a sound that distinguishes it from other sounds, even when they have the same pitch and loudness.


## Quantization ##

In analog-to-digital conversion (ADC), quantization is the process of representing a continuous analog signal with a finite set of discrete digital values. Pulse-Code Modulation (PCM) is a common method used in digital audio for quantizing analog signals into digital format.

The fidelity (quality) of a PCM stream is represented by two attributes:
1. **bit depth** - the size of possible amplitude values we can record for each audio sample.

2. **sample rate** - the number of samples per second that are taken from a wave. 

We often use:
+ **8-bit/8kHz** - telephony
+ **16-bit/44.1kHz** - Compact Disc (CD)
+ **higher than 16-bit/44.1kHz** - high definition (HD) audio

## Codec ##

As PCM is a header-less raw digital audio format (used to represent audio samples), it usually needs to be encapsulated within a container format such as WAV to be playable by most audio players. 

These container formats provide the necessary structure and metadata to identify key parameters of the audio, there are 3 major groups:

+ **Uncompressed** - WAV, AIFF, AU
+ **Lossless compression** - FLAC, ALAC
+ **Lossy compression** - MP3, AAC

An example for WAV container header, relevant definition can be found in http://soundfile.sapp.org/doc/WaveFormat/.

``` 
$ hexdump -C test.wav  | head
00000000  52 49 46 46 90 6c 00 00  57 41 56 45 66 6d 74 20  |RIFF.l..WAVEfmt |
00000010  10 00 00 00 07 00 01 00  40 1f 00 00 40 1f 00 00  |........@...@...|
00000020  01 00 08 00 64 61 74 61  6c 6c 00 00 fb fb f9 fb  |....datall......|
00000030  fb fb fb fb f9 ff 7e 76  75 78 75 76 76 73 79 75  |......~vuxuvvsyu|
00000040  79 75 75 77 73 7a 79 79  7c 7a 79 7a 7a 77 7c 7c  |yuuwszyy|zyzzw|||
```

